The title of this book is intended as an elementary IQ test for the reader: if the first association it generates is the vulgar anti-communist cliché—“You are right—today, after the tragedy of twentieth-century totalitarianism, all the talk about a return to communism can only be farcical\!”—then I sincerely advise you to stop here. Indeed, the book should be forcibly confiscated from you, since it deals with an entirely different tragedy and farce, namely, the two events which mark the beginning and the end of the first decade of the twenty-first century: the attacks of September 11, 2001 and the financial meltdown of 2008.

We should note the similarity of President Bush’s language in his addresses to the American people after 9/11 and after the financial collapse: they sounded very much like two versions of the same speech. Both times Bush evoked the threat to the American way of life and the need to take fast and decisive action to cope with the danger. Both times he called for the partial suspension of American values \(guarantees of individual freedom, market capitalism\) in order to save these very same values. From whence comes this similarity?

Marx began his *Eighteenth Brumaire* with a correction of Hegel’s idea that history necessarily repeats itself: “Hegel remarks somewhere that all great events and characters of world history occur, so to speak, twice. He forgot to add: the first time as tragedy, the second time as farce.” This supplement to Hegel’s notion of historical repetition was a rhetorical figure which had already haunted Marx years earlier: we find it in his “A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right,” where he diagnoses the decay of the German *ancien régime* in the 1830s and 1840s as a farcical repetition of the tragic fall of the French *ancien régime*:

It is instructive for \[the modern nations\] to see the *ancien régime*, which in their countries has experienced its *tragedy*, play its *comic* role as a German phantom. Its history was *tragic* as long as it was the pre-existing power in the world and freedom a personal whim—in a word, as long as it believed, and had to believe, in its own privileges. As long as the *ancien régime*, as an established world order, was struggling against a world that was only just emerging, there was a world-historical error on its side but not a personal one. Its downfall was therefore tragic.

The present German regime, on the other hand—an anachronism, a flagrant contradiction of universally accepted axioms, the futility of the *ancien régime* displayed for all the world to see—only imagines that it still believes in itself and asks the world to share in its fantasy. If it believed in its own *nature*, would it try to hide that nature under the *appearance* of an alien nature and seek its salvation in hypocrisy and sophism? The modern *ancien régime* is rather merely the *clown* of a world order whose *real heroes* are dead. History is thorough and passes through many stages while bearing an ancient form to its grave. The last phase of a world-historical form is its *comedy*. The Greek gods, who already died once of their wounds in Aeschylus’s tragedy *Prometheus Bound*, were forced to die a second death—this time a comic one—in Lucian’s *Dialogues*. Why does history take this course? So that mankind may part *happily* with its past. We lay claim to this *happy* historical destiny for the political powers of Germany.

Note the precise characterization of the German *ancien régime* as the one which “only imagines that it still believes in itself”—one can even speculate about the meaning of the fact that, during the same period, Kierkegaard deployed his idea that we humans cannot ever be sure that we believe: ultimately, we only “believe that we believe.” The formula of a régime which “only imagines that it believes in itself” nicely captures the cancellation of the performative power \(“symbolic efficiency”\) of the ruling ideology: it no longer effectively functions as the fundamental structure of the social bond. And, we may ask, are we not today in the same situation? Do today’s preachers and practitioners of liberal democracy not also “only imagine that they believe in themselves,” in their pronunciations? In fact, it would be more appropriate to describe contemporary cynicism as representing an exact inversion of Marx’s formula: today, we only imagine that we do *not* “really believe” in our ideology—in spite of this imaginary distance, we continue to practise it. We believe not less but much more than we imagine we believe. Benjamin was thus indeed prescient in his remark that “everything depends on how one believes in one’s belief.”

Twelve years prior to 9/11, on November 9, 1989, the Berlin Wall fell. This event seemed to announce the beginning of the “happy ’90s,” Francis Fukuyama’s utopia of the “end of history,” the belief that liberal democracy had, in principle, won out, that the advent of a global liberal community was hovering just around the corner, and that the obstacles to this Hollywood-style ending were merely empirical and contingent \(local pockets of resistance whose leaders had not yet grasped that their time was up\). September 11, in contrast, symbolized the end of the Clintonite period, and heralded an era in which new walls were seen emerging everywhere: between Israel and the West Bank, around the European Union, along the US–Mexico border, but also within nation-states themselves.

In an article for *Newsweek*, Emily Flynn Vencat and Ginanne Brownell report how today,  
>>
the members-only phenomenon is exploding into a whole way of life, encompassing everything from private banking conditions to invitation-only health clinics... those with money are increasingly locking their entire lives behind closed doors. Rather than attend media-heavy events, they arrange private concerts, fashion shows and art exhibitions in their own homes. They shop after-hours, and have their neighbors \(and potential friends\) vetted for class and cash.
>>

A new global class is thus emerging “with, say, an Indian passport, a castle in Scotland, a *pied-à-terre* in Manhattan and a private Caribbean island”— the paradox is that the members of this global class “dine privately, shop privately, view art privately, everything is private, private, private.” They are thus creating a life-world of their own to solve their anguishing hermeneutic problem; as Todd Millay puts it: “wealthy families can’t just ‘invite people over and expect them to understand what it’s like to have $300 million.’” So what *are* their contacts with the world at large? They come in two forms: business and humanitarianism \(protecting the environment, fighting against diseases, supporting the arts, etc.\). These global citizens live their lives mostly in pristine nature—whether trekking in Patagonia or swimming in the translucent waters of their private islands. One cannot help but note that one feature basic to the attitude of these gated superrich is *fear*: fear of external social life itself. The highest priorities of the “ultrahigh-net-worth individuals” are thus how to minimize security risks—diseases, exposure to threats of violent crime, and so forth.

In contemporary China, the new rich have built secluded communities modeled upon idealized “typical” Western towns; there is, for example, near Shanghai a “real” replica of a small English town, including a main street with pubs, an Anglican church, a Sainsbury supermarket, etc.—the whole area is isolated from its surroundings by an invisible, but no less real, cupola. There is no longer a hierarchy of social groups within the same nation—residents in this town live in a universe for which, within its ideological imaginary, the “lower class” surrounding world simply *does not exist*. Are not these “global citizens” living in secluded areas the true counter-pole to those living in slums and other “white spots” of the public sphere? They are, indeed, two sides of the same coin, the two extremes of the new class division. The city that best embodies that division is São Paulo in Lula’s Brazil, which boasts 250 heliports in its central downtown area. To insulate themselves from the dangers of mingling with ordinary people, the rich of São Paulo prefer to use helicopters, so that, looking around the skyline of the city, one really does feel as if one is in a futuristic megalopolis of the kind pictured in films such as *Blade Runner* or *The Fifth Element*, with ordinary people swarming through the dangerous streets down below, whilst the rich float around on a higher level, up in the air.

It thus seems that Fukuyama’s utopia of the 1990s had to die twice, since the collapse of the liberal-democratic political utopia on 9/11 did not affect the economic utopia of global market capitalism; if the 2008 financial meltdown has a historical meaning then, it is as a sign of the end of the economic face of Fukuyama’s dream. Which brings us back to Marx’s paraphrase of Hegel: one should recall that, in his introduction to a new edition of *Eighteenth Brumaire* in the 1960s, Herbert Marcuse added yet another turn of the screw: sometimes, the repetition in the guise of a farce can be more terrifying than the original tragedy.

This book takes the ongoing crisis as a starting point, gradually moving to “related matters,” by way of unraveling its conditions and implications. The first chapter offers a diagnosis of our predicament, outlining the utopian core of the capitalist ideology which determined both the crisis itself and our perceptions of and reactions to it. The second chapter endeavors to locate aspects of our situation which open up the space for new forms of communist praxis.

What the book offers is not a neutral analysis but an engaged and extremely “partial” one—for *truth is partial*, accessible only when one takes sides, and is no less universal for this reason. The side taken here is, of course, that of communism. Adorno begins his *Three Studies on Hegel* with a rebuttal of the traditional question about Hegel exemplified by the title of Benedetto Croce’s book *What Is Living and What Is Dead in the Philosophy of Hegel?* Such a question presupposes, on the part of the author, the adoption of an arrogant position as judge of the past; but when we are dealing with a truly great philosopher the real question to be raised concerns not what this philosopher may still tell us, what he may still mean to us, but rather the opposite, namely, what *we* are, what our contemporary situation might be, in *his* eyes, how our epoch would appear to *his* thought. And the same should apply to communism—instead of asking the obvious question “Is the idea of communism still pertinent today, can it still be used as a tool of analysis and political practise?” one should ask the opposite question: “How does our predicament today look from the perspective of the communist idea?” Therein resides the dialectic of the Old and the New: it is those who propose the constant creation of new terms \(“postmodern society,” “risk society,” “informational society,” “postindustrial society,” etc.\) in order to grasp what is going on today who miss the contours of what is actually New. The only way to grasp the true novelty of the New is to analyze the world through the lenses of what was “eternal” in the Old. If communism really is an “eternal” Idea, then it works as a Hegelian “concrete universality”: it is eternal not in the sense of a series of abstract-universal features that may be applied everywhere, but in the sense that it has to be re-invented in each new historical situation.

In the good old days of Really Existing Socialism, a joke popular among dissidents was used to illustrate the futility of their protests. In the fifteenth century, when Russia was occupied by Mongols, a peasant and his wife were walking along a dusty country road; a Mongol warrior on a horse stopped at their side and told the peasant he would now proceed to rape his wife; he then added: “But since there is a lot of dust on the ground, you must hold my testicles while I rape your wife, so that they will not get dirty\!” Once the Mongol had done the deed and ridden away, the peasant started laughing and jumping with joy. His surprised wife asked: “How can you be jumping with joy when I was just brutally raped in your presence?” The farmer answered: “But I got him\! His balls are covered with dust\!” This sad joke reveals the predicament of the dissidents: they thought they were dealing serious blows to the party *nomenklatura*, but all they were doing was slightly soiling the *nomenklatura*’s testicles, while the ruling elite carried on raping the people...

Is today’s critical Left not in a similar position? \(Among the contemporary names for ever-so-slightly smearing those in power, we could list “deconstruction,” or the “protection of individual freedoms.”\) In a famous confrontation at the university of Salamanca in 1936, Miguel de Unamuno quipped at the Francoists: “*Venceréis, pero no convenceréis*” \(“You will win, but you will not convince”\)—is this all that today’s Left can say to triumphant global capitalism? Is the Left predestined to continue to play the role of those who, on the contrary, convince but nevertheless still lose \(and are especially convincing in retroactively explaining the reasons for their own failure\)? Our task is to discover how to go a step further. Our Thesis 11 should be: in our societies, critical Leftists have hitherto only succeeded in soiling those in power, whereas the real point is to castrate them...

But how can we do this? We should learn here from the failures of twentieth century Leftist politics. The task is not to conduct the castration in a direct climactic confrontation, but to undermine those in power with patient ideologico-critical work, so that although they are still in power, one all of a sudden notices that the powers-that-be are afflicted with unnaturally high-pitched voices. Back in the 1960s, Lacan named the irregular short-lived periodical of his school *Scilicet*—the message was not the word’s predominant meaning today \(“namely,” “to wit,” “that is to say”\), but literally “it is permitted to know.” \(To know what?—what the Freudian School of Paris thinks about the unconscious...\) Today, our message should be the same: it is permitted to know and to fully engage in communism, to again act in full fidelity to the communist Idea. Liberal permissiveness is of the order of *videlicet*—it is permitted to *see*, but the very fascination with the obscenity we are allowed to observe prevents us from *knowing what it is that we see*.

The moral of the story: the time for liberal-democratic moralistic blackmail is over. Our side no longer has to go on apologizing; while the other side had better start soon.

The only truly surprising thing about the 2008 financial meltdown is how easily the idea was accepted that its happening was an unpredictable surprise which hit the markets out of the blue. Recall the demonstrations which, throughout the first decade of the new millennium, regularly accompanied meetings of the IMF and the World Bank: the protesters’ complaints took in not only the usual anti-globalizing motifs \(the growing exploitation of Third World countries, and so forth\), but also how the banks were creating the illusion of growth by playing with fictional money, and how this would all have to end in a crash. It was not only economists such as Paul Krugman and Joseph Stiglitz who warned of the dangers ahead and made it clear that those who promised continuous growth did not really understand what was going on under their noses. In Washington in 2004, so many people demonstrated about the danger of a financial collapse that the police had to mobilize 8,000 additional local policemen and bring in a further 6,000 from Maryland and Virginia. What ensued was tear-gassing, clubbing and mass arrests—so many that police had to use buses for transport. The message was loud and clear, and the police were used literally to stifle the truth.

After this sustained effort of wilful ignorance, it is no wonder that, when the crisis did finally break out, as one of the participants put it, “No one really \[knew\] what to do.” The reason being that expectations are part of the game: how the market will react depends not only on how much people trust this or that intervention, but even more so on how much they think *others* will trust them—one cannot take into account the effects of one’s own choices. Long ago, John Maynard Keynes rendered this self-referentiality nicely when he compared the stock market to a silly competition in which the participants have to pick several pretty girls from a hundred photographs, the winner being the one who chooses girls closest to the average opinion: “It is not a case of choosing those which, to the best of one’s judgment, are really the prettiest, nor even those which average opinion genuinely thinks the prettiest. We have reached the third degree where we devote our intelligence to anticipating what average opinion expects the average opinion to be.” So, we are forced to choose without having at our disposal the knowledge that would enable a qualified choice, or, as John Gray put it: “*We are forced to live as if we were free.*”
